like many of us
I've had several careers in my life and
although they've been varied my first
job set the foundation for all of them I
was a home birth midwife throughout my
20s delivering babies taught me valuable
and sometimes surprising things like how
to start a car at 2:00 a.m. when it's 10
degrees below zero or how to revive a
father who's fainted at the sight of
blood or how to cut the umbilical cord
just so to make a beautiful belly button
but those aren't the things that stuck
with me or guided me when I stopped
being a midwife and started other jobs
what stuck with me was this bedrock
belief that each one of us comes into
this world with a unique worth when I
looked into the face of a newborn I
caught a glimpse of that worthiness that
sense of unapologetic selfhood that
unique spark I use the word soul to
describe that spark because it's the
only word in English that comes close to
naming what each baby brought into the
room every newborn was as singular as a
snowflake a matchless mash-up of biology
and ancestry and mystery and then that
baby grows up and in order to fit into
the family to conform to the culture to
the community to the gender that little
one begins to cover its soul layer by
layer we're born this way but
as we grow a lot of things happen to us
that make us want to hide our soulful
eccentricities and authenticity we've
all done this everyone in this room is a
former baby with a distinctive
birthright but as adults we spend so
much of our time uncomfortable in our
own skin like we have a didi
authenticity deficit disorder but not
those babies not yet
their message to me was uncover your
soul and look for that soul spark in
everyone else it's still there and
here's what I learned from laboring
women their message was about staying
open even when things are painful a
woman's cervix normally looks like this
it's a tight little muscle at the base
of the uterus and during labor it has to
stretch from this to this ouch
if you fight against that pain you just
create more pain and you block what
wants to be born I'll never forget the
magic that would happen when a woman
stopped resisting the pain and opened it
was if the forces of the universe took
notice and sent in a wave of help I
never forgot that message and now when
difficult or painful things happen to me
in my life or my work of course at first
I resist them but then I remember what I
learned from the mothers stay open stay
curious
ask the pain what it's come to deliver
something new wants to be born and there
was one more big soulful lesson and that
one I learned from Albert Einstein he
wasn't at any of the births but it was a
lesson about time at the end of his life
Albert Einstein concluded that our
normal
hamsterwheel experience of life is an
illusion
we run round and round faster and faster
trying to get somewhere and all the
while underneath surface time is this
whole other dimension where the past and
the present and the future
merge and become deep time and there's
nowhere to get to Albert Einstein called
this state this this dimension only
being and he said when he experienced it
he knew sacred aw when I was delivering
babies I was forced off the hamster
wheel sometimes I had to sit for days
hours and hours just breathing with the
parents just being and I got a big dose
of sacred all so those are the three
lessons I took with me from midwifery
one uncover your soul two when things
get difficult or painful try to stay
open and three every now and then step
off your hamster wheel into deep time
those lessons have served me throughout
my life but they really served me
recently when I took on the most
important job of my life thus far two
years ago
my younger sister came out of remission
from a rare blood cancer and the only
treatment left for her was a bone-marrow
transplant and against the odds we found
a match for her who turned out to be me
I come from a family of four girls and
when my sisters found out that I was my
sister's perfect genetic match their
reaction was really you
a perfect match for her which is pretty
typical for siblings in a sibling
Society there's lots of things there's
love and there's friendship and there's
protection but there's also jealousy and
competition and rejection and attack in
sibling hood that's where we start
assembling many of those first layers
that cover our soul when I discovered I
was my sister's match I went into
research mode and I discovered that the
premise of transplant is pretty
straightforward you destroy all the bone
marrow in the cancer patient with
massive doses of chemotherapy and then
you replace that marrow with several
million healthy marrow cells from a
donor and then you do everything you can
to make sure that those new cells
engraft and the patient I also learned
that bone marrow transplants are fraught
with danger if my sister made it through
the near lethal chemotherapy she still
would face other challenges my cells
might attack her body and her body might
reject my cells they call this rejection
or attack and both could kill her
rejection attack those words had a
familiar ring in the context of being
siblings my sister and I had a long
history of love but we also had a long
history of rejection and attack from
minor misunderstandings to bigger
betrayals we didn't have the kind of
relationship where we talked about the
deeper stuff but like many siblings and
like people in all kinds of
relationships we were hesitant to tell
our truths to reveal our wounds to admit
our wrongdoings but when I learned about
the dangers of rejection or attack I
thought it's time to change this what if
we left the
bone-marrow transplant up to the doctors
but did something that we later came to
call our soul marrow transplant what if
we faced any pain
we had caused each other and instead of
rejection or attack could we listen
could we forgive could we merge would
that teach our cells to do the same to
will my skeptical sister I turn to my
parents holy text The New Yorker
magazine I sent her a cartoon from its
pages as a way of explaining why we
should visit a therapist before having
my bone marrow harvested and
transplanted into her body here it is
I have never forgiven him for that thing
I made up in my head I told my sister we
had probably been doing the same thing
carting around made-up stories in our
heads that kept us separate and I told
her that after the transplant all the
blood flowing in her veins would be my
blood made from my marrow cells and that
inside the nucleus of each of those
cells is a complete set of my DNA I will
be swimming around in you for the rest
of your life I told my slightly
horrified sister I think we better clean
up our relationship a health crisis
makes people do all sorts of risky
things like quitting a job or jumping
out of an airplane and in the case of my
sister saying yes to several therapy
sessions during which we got down to the
marrow we looked at and released years
of stories and assumptions about each
other and blame and shame until all that
was left was love people have said I was
brave to undergo
the bone-marrow harvest but I don't
think so what felt braved to me was that
other kind of harvest and transplant
the soul marrow transplant getting
emotionally naked with another human
being
putting aside pride and defensiveness
lifting the layers and sharing with each
other our vulnerable Souls I called on
those midwife lessons uncover your soul
open to what scary and painful look for
the sacred aw Here I am with my marrow
cells after the harvest that's what they
call it harvest like it's some kind of
bucolic farm-to-table event which I can
assure you it is not and here is my
brave brave sister receiving my cells
after the transplant we began to spend
more and more time together
It was as if we were little girls again
the past and the present merged we
entered deep time I left the hamster
wheel of work and life to join my sister
on that lonely island of illness and
healing we spent months together in the
isolation unit in the hospital and in
her home our fast-paced society does not
support or even value this kind of work
we see it as a disruption of real life
and important work we worry about the
emotional drain and the financial cost
and yes there is a financial cost but I
was paid in the kind of currency that
our culture seems to have forgotten all
about I was paid in love I was paid in
soul I was paid in my sister my sister
said that the year after transplant was
the best year of her life which was
surprising she suffered so much
but she said life never tasted as sweet
and that because of the sole bearing and
the truth-telling we had done with each
other she became more unapologetically
herself with everyone she said things
she'd always needed to say she did
things she always wanted to do the same
happened for me I became braver about
being authentic with the people in my
life I said my truths but more important
than that I sought the truth of others
it wasn't until the final chapter of
this story that I realized just how well
midwifery had trained me after that best
year of my sister's life the cancer came
roaring back and this time there was
nothing more the doctors could do they
gave her just a couple of months to live
the night before my sister died I sat by
her bedside she was so small and thin I
could see the blood pulsing in her neck
it was my blood her blood our blood when
she died part of me would die too I
tried to make sense of it all how
becoming one with each other had made us
more ourselves our soul selves and how
by facing and opening to the pain of our
past we'd finally been delivered to each
other and how by stepping out of time we
would now be connected forever my sister
left me with so many things and I'm
going to leave you now with just one of
them you don't have to wait for a
life-or-death situation to clean up the
relationships that matter to you to
offer the marrow of your soul and to
seek it in another we can all do this we
can be like a new kind of
first-responder lie
the one to take the first courageous
step toward the other and to do
something or to try to do something
other than rejection or attack we can do
this with our siblings and our mates and
our friends and our colleagues we can do
this with the disconnection and the
discord all around us we can do this
for the soul of the world thank you
[Applause]